# seksi 1
on a separate note

# seksi 2
on a separate note

# seksi 3
We have about 140 million open-source or software projects that are on  GitHub, and over 50 million of those have been added just in the last  year, so it's growing incredibly fast.  And the community has expanded far beyond idealistic hobbyists, as major  companies are increasingly leading the charge, spearheading the  development of open-source projects in-house.  So we see companies like Intel, Google, Facebook, Amazon, Microsoft all  contributing heavily to open-source, Googlers have been contributing to  over 28 thousand projects in 2018.  This number includes projects that Google has driven as well as  contributions it's made to projects led by other companies or individuals.  In the open-source world, you have these fierce commercial rivals who  collaborate every day together.  And they haven't signed anything.  And it's not just software companies.  ExxonMobil has open-sourced its developer toolkit.  Walmart open-sourced its cloud management platform, and Goldman Sachs  recently open-sourced its data modeling program.  This open-source way of working turned out to be better.  Because even in a big tech company where you might have 20 or 30 or 50  thousand developers, you can't compete with the 40 million developers that  are now on GitHub working on open-source every day.  Put simply, open-source development has become the new norm.  And so I expect to see more and more investment into open-source  communities and more and more projects as well as companies finding ways  to commercially monetize the activity that's collected across all of these  different open-source communities.  So how is open-source monetized, when the product is basically given away  for free? Basically, the answer lies in selling support services,  subscriptions and/or commercial versions of the software.

Red Hat, founded in 1993, was the first to figure out a successful  business model, which relies upon selling support services for its  operating system, Red Hat Enterprise Linux.

Anyone can download the software for free, but if businesses want  technical support and greater security, they'll need to buy a  subscription.

 After decades of commercial success, IBM officially acquired  Red Hat in 2019 for 34 billion dollars.

 It was the largest software acquisition in history.  It's really groundbreaking, and it just shows the power and success of  open-source across the world, across the industries.  While Red Hat's 100 percent open-source model has been hard to replicate,  other companies like database program MongoDB and integration platform  MuleSoft, rely upon an "open-core" model, meaning the basic features are  free, but add-ons and other useful elements are proprietary.  As these companies have racked up multi-billion dollar valuations, there's  no doubt that on the enterprise level, there's big money in open-source. 

# hobbyists
But as for the individual developers, the hobbyists who contribute to and  maintain open-source projects just for fun, their path to profitability is  much less clear. There are a lot of different models for how people make  money in open-source.  One of the models is actually they don't.  A lot of them are volunteers and they do this in their free time, in the  evenings and on the weekends.  But sometimes these "just for fun" side projects end up becoming widely  used, critical to the internet infrastructure that we generally take for  granted. Certain projects get so popular and so widely used that, you  know, they're in every product.  They're used by every company. And then this result of like, you know,  massive Fortune 100, Fortune 500 companies building their businesses on  top of this code that's written by hobbyists for who knows what reason,  right? As one might imagine, problems can arise when critical systems are  based on software that's maintained by unpaid volunteers with no  professional obligation to see to the maintenance of the project.  This issue came to a head in 2014, when the security vulnerability dubbed  Heartbleed was found in OpenSSL, an open-source encryption technology  that's used by the majority of web servers to protect user's personal  data. The flaw has gone undetected for about two years and has exposed  millions of usernames, passwords and possibly credit card info as well.  They left this lock capable of being picked, because they didn't write the  code quite right.  And when they looked into it, the OpenSSL team was tiny.  It was just a few people, who were mostly working on donations, and their  donations had started to dry up.  And understandably, these incredibly talented programmers had a hard time  justifying spending full-time on this, even though it was one of the most  important building blocks of the entire Internet.  Ultimately, organizations like the Linux Foundation pulled together to  provide financial support for OpenSSL, as well as other critical pieces of  underfunded open-source software.  But the disaster served as a wakeup call for an industry that still  largely relies upon unpaid labor.  The burden on the maintainer can become quite intense.  You have sort of all these businesses coming and saying like, you know,  your code is broken, and it's preventing me from getting my job done.  

And so you get this like almost intense guilt, I feel like, a lot of  maintainers have a guilt.  Now, companies are taking note and helping to formalize new funding  models. In 2019, GitHub rolled out their Sponsors program, which allows  developers to give and receive recurring donations for their work.  We already have some people who are making their full living on GitHub  Sponsors, so they don't have another job.  And so that's huge for us.  And that's really the key number that we are trying to move up.  For developers like Aboukhadijeh, making a full-time living around  open-source is indeed the dream.  I prefer the freedom of being able to just follow my interests wherever  they go and solve whatever problems I think are interesting.  I'll never make money from some of the stuff I've worked on, but I think  I've done a lot of good in the world by working on it.  It's still early days, but if funding models like GitHub Sponsors pay off,  we may see a new class of software engineers eschewing traditional tech  jobs in favor of independent, open-source work.  Open-source has created so much technological progress.  But because it never quite solved this funding problem in those early  years, I think that we are at a point now where we could lay the  groundwork for the next stage of open-source.  This could also mean expanding the cooperative ethos to industries outside  of software. As the idea of sharing technology and collaborating  collectively expands, we're moving into open hardware initiatives,  data-sharing initiatives, and that's really going to be the future.  After all, the success of open-source reveals that collaboration and  knowledge sharing are more than just feel-good buzzwords, they're an  effective business strategy.  And if we're going to solve some of the world's biggest problems, many  believe that we can't afford to hoard our resources and learnings.  We have environmental concerns.  We're trying to understand things like cancer and Alzheimer's.  These are major collaborative efforts.  The complexity of building these technologies isn't going down, it's only  going up. We can get that technology out there faster when everybody works  together.  