amal-manusia.md


# amal manusia, human deeds
When one talks about the comparative weightiness of human deeds, one speaks essentially of their consequences for man's destiny. 

We recall once again the metaphor of the "foam that mounts upon the torrent" but which quickly becomes nothing, leaving no consequences behind, while "that which benefits mankind stays in the earth." Further: Did you not see how God strikes the parable of a good word like a luxuriant tree whose root strikes deep into the earth and whose top hits the sky? It gives its fruit all the time by permission of its Lord—and Allāh strikes parables for men on the chance that they will take admonition. The parable of a heinous word [on the other hand] is that of a heinous tree that has been rooted out without finding any place to stay. (14.Ibrāheem:24-26) It is in this sense that all evil deeds, especially worship of false gods, are very often termed đalāl by the Qur’ān. This term is usually translated as "misguidedness," which is correct provided we clearly understand that "misguidedness" and "wrong path" signify primarily that "one will not get anywhere," no matter how long or how hard one walks—indeed, one will fall into a pit. That is to say, đalāl is sterile, inconsequential, in vain, and its equivalent term, bāţil, is also used in this sense by the Qur’ān. The results of evil deeds are often portrayed in the Qur’ān by powerful and lively symbols of burning in hell-fire, whose "hissing sound" can be heard from afar by the sinful and which burns even rocks. 