man as individual
...
Oleh karena itu Setan memulai karirnya bersama Adam; mereka adalah sesame, dan Al-Qur'an terus-menerus berbicara tentang Setan bukan sebagai prinsip anti-Tuhan (meskipun dia tidak diragukan lagi adalah seorang pemberontak terhadap Tuhan, dan, memang, mempersonifikasikan sifat pemberontak ini) melainkan sebagai kekuatan anti-manusia, terus-menerus mencoba untuk membujuk manusia agar menjauh dari jalan "lurus" alaminya menuju perilaku yang menyimpang.

Fakta moral yang terdalam inilah yang merupakan tantangan abadi bagi manusia dan menjadikan hidupnya perjuangan moral yang tak henti-hentinya. Dalam pergumulan ini, Tuhan menyertai manusia, asalkan manusia melakukan upaya yang diperlukan (neccesary effort).

Manusia bertanggung jawab atas upaya ini karena ia unik dalam tatanan ciptaan, yang diberkahi dengan pilihan bebas untuk memenuhi misinya sebagai wakil Tuhan. Misi inilah - upaya untuk menciptakan tatanan sosial moral di bumi - yang oleh Al-Qur'an (33.al-Aħzāb: 72) digambarkan sebagai "Kepercayaan."

Indeed it is these men who are the cream of all creation, outstripping even the angels, whom they excel in both knowledge and virtue.

Sesungguhnya orang-orang inilah yang adalah krim dari semua ciptaan, bahkan melebihi para malaikat, yang mereka kuasai baik dalam pengetahuan maupun kebajikan.

We shall presently essay the Qur’ān's analysis of the basic human weakness and its remedy but here it may be noted that although Satan "waylays man from all sides," his machinations fail against really virtuous persons. To be sure, no man is immune from the devil's temptations-not even the prophets (22.al-Ħajj:52; 17.al-Isrā’:53), nor yet the Prophet Muħammad (PBUH) himself (7.al-A‘rāf:200; 41.Fuşşilat:36) —yet it is within the reach of any true man of faith and will, let alone the prophets, to overcome them (15.al-Ħijr:42; 17.al-Isrā’:65; 16.an-Naħl:99). The reason is that such men, amidst all temptations, keep intact their "primordial nature [fiţra] upon which God created man," which "cannot be [logically] altered [although it may be more or less temporarily disturbed]" (30.ar-Rūm:30). Indeed it is these men who are the cream of all creation, outstripping even the angels, whom they excel in both knowledge and virtue. It is these men who fully realize that man "has not been created in sport" but has a serious task (23.al-Mu’minūn:115) and is answerable for his success or failure, for both God and man have taken a grave risk in this vital affair, the vicegerency of man. The bane of humanity so far is that most men refuse to "look beyond [al-‘āqiba]," "do not lay any store by for the morrow," i.e., do not contribute to—and do not even understand or attempt to understand—the long-range moral goals of the human endeavour. They are content to live their lives from day to day, indeed, from hour to hour: "they are like cattle, indeed, worse" (7.al-A‘rāf:179); "they have hearts but cannot understand, they have eyes but cannot see, they have ears but cannot hear" (7.al-A‘rāf:179, and elsewhere). Their primordial nature has been distorted almost beyond recognition; they became "Satan's brothers" (17.al-Isrā’:27) after God had breathed His own spirit into Adam (15.al-Ħijr:29; 32.as-Sajdah:9; 38.Şād:72; cf. 95.at-Teen:4-6). "We created man with the best constitution, but then We sent him down to the lowest state of the low, except those who believe and do good works" (95.at-Teen:5). The Qur’ān does not hold to original sin as such but states that Adam and Eve were forgiven their sin after he had received his Lord's Words (2.al-Baqarah:37). From here arise a whole series of Qur’ānic verses that speak of "God's sealing up the hearts of men, putting blinds on their eyes, casting chains up to their chins, so that they cannot look down and ponder." The Qur’ān does not hold that God arbitrarily seals people's hearts, but usually says that God does so because of the actions of men themselves ("because of their initial infidelity" [6.al-An‘ām:110; 2.al-Baqarah:88]; "because of their transgression" [2.al-Baqarah:59; 6.al-An‘ām:49], and similar phrases abound in the Qur’ān). Indeed, "We turn man whichever way he wants in turn" (4.an-Nisā’:115), and, "God does not change the situation of a people until they change it themselves" (13.ar-Ra‘d:11; 8.al-Anfāl:53), i.e., unless men take the initiative. The Qur’ān states repeatedly that every man and woman individually and every people collectively are alone responsible for what they do—a doctrine that underlies the Qur’ānic rejection of redemption. In 29.al-‘Ankabūt:12 we are told that rich and strong Meccan pagans asked the followers of Muħammad (PBUH) "to follow our way and [if necessary] we shall bear the burden of your sins," and the Qur’ān adds the former will never bear the latter's burden—although they shall bear manifold burdens of their own! The idea behind verses about the sealing of hearts appears to be the psychological law that if a person once does a good or an evil deed, his chances of repeating that kind of action increase and of doing its opposite proportionately decrease. With constant repetition of an evil or of a good action, it becomes almost impossible for a person to do the opposite, or even to think of it, so much so that while men's heart  become "sealed" and their eyes "blinded" if they do evil, their doing good produces such a state of mind that the devil himself can have no sway over it. Nevertheless, actions which create a psychological habit, however strong their influence may be, must not be construed as absolute determinants, for there is no "point of no return" for human behavior: genuine repentance (tauba) can turn an apparently wholly evil man into a paragon of virtue; on the other hand, although this is much more rare, an apparent paragon of virtue (even a prophet!) can turn into a near devil enmeshed in carnal pleasures (7.al-A‘rāf:175-176).  To hold that the Qur’ān believes in an absolute determinism of human behavior, denying free choice on man's part, is not only to deny almost the entire content of the Qur’ān, but to undercut its very basis: the Qur’ān by its own claim is an invitation to man to come to the right path (hudan lil-nās). This picture is quite complex, however, and needs to be clarified. The Qur’ān, it is true, often speaks as though man consciously chooses for himself right or wrong ways and follows them, and God only passes judgment upon his actions (e.g., 53.an-Najm:39-40; 76.al-Insān:3; 90.al-Balad:10 ff.; 91.ash-Shams:7-10). But the Qur’ān states even more often that when man takes a direction, God entrenches him in it: "So, for him who gives [of his wealth], guards against evil, and confirms goodness, We make good easy for him, but for him who is niggardly, thinks he is self-sufficient, and gives the lie to goodness, We make evil easy for him" (92.al-Layl:5-10)—and for this we have above provided a psychological explanation. But how or why does a human take a certain road? How does he attune himself to God or turn away from Him? It appears that man does not require much effort to be petty, self-seeking, submerged in his day-to-day life, and a slave of his desires, not because this is "natural" to him—for his real nature is to be exalted—but because "gravitating down to the earth," as we have quoted the Qur’ānic language, is much easier than ascending to the heights of purity. Therefore, God's role, His succor, and His support in the latter case are very crucial: no man can say "I am going to be a good person" and automatically become one. He has to struggle, and in this struggle God is his willing partner. Yet, God may not be taken for granted as though His partnership were automatic; this has to do with both the quality and the quantity of the struggle and it can be described almost literally as God's mercy. In Muħammad's (PBUH) own case, the Qur’ān makes it clear (28.al-Qaşaş:86)— despite his travail in the cave of Hirā’—that "You were not expecting that The Book will be sent down upon you, except that it is a mercy from your Lord" and sometimes even threatens him with the possible cessation Of Revelation (17.al-Isrā’:86): “If We willed, We would take away the Revelation from you and in that case you shall not find any support against Us, but it is a mercy from your Lord" (for a fuller elaboration, see Chapter V). When man "gravitates down to the earth," his conscience becomes dull and he cannot effectively listen to the voice of his true, higher nature "[as though] these people are being called from a distant place" (41.Fuşşilat:44). Further, a man not only cannot listen, but is irritated by being constantly reminded of the truth; this irritation, when accompanied by false honor and pride personal, family, national, and historical—changes into positive resistance and rejection of truth—what the Qur’ān terms kufr, practically equating it with this special kind of pride. Just as ascending to virtue means God's active cooperation and help, kufr means positive desertion by God. It is in this context that the Qur’ān throws God's indispensability for man into bold relief. Just as God's "remembrance" and presence means the meaningfulness and purposefulness of life, the removal of God from human consciousness means the removal of meaning and purpose from human life: "Do not be like those who forgot God and [eventually] He caused them to forget themselves—these are the unrighteous ones" (59.al-Ħashr:19). This is as true of the collective life of peoples (as we shall see in the next chapter) as it is of individual life. God's "remembrance" ensures the cementing of personality where all details of life and particulars of human activity are properly integrated and synthesized; "forgetting" God, on the other hand, means fragmented existence, "secularized" life, an unintegrated and eventually disintegrated personality, and enmeshment in the details at the cost of the whole. This is precisely Muħammad Iqbāl's distinction between Godliness and un-Godliness.   The sign of a kāfir is that he is lost in the horizons; The sign of a mu’min is that the horizons are lost in him.